Add documentation - Getting Started : Modify API behavior (#1826)
kuzzleio/kuzzle: doc/2/guides/getting-started/7-modify-api-behavior/index.md

---
code: false
type: page
title: Modify API behavior
description: Use the fine-grained middleware-like system
order: 700
---

# Modify API behavior

> Kuzzle allows to modify API action behavior with a very precise middleware-like system.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kuzzle allows to modify API actions behavior with a very precise middleware-like system.  
```

This system makes it possible to modify the execution flow of requests processed by Kuzzle.

## Events

> Each time a request is executed, Kuzzle will emit several events in order to be able to influence the life cycle of the request processing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every time a request is executed, Kuzzle emits several events to allow changing the life cycle of the processing request.
```

> There is many different events available, you can see the complete list here: [Kuzzle events](/core/2/api/some-link).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are many different events available, you can see the complete list here: [Kuzzle events](/core/2/api/some-link).
```

### API events

> The most frequently used events are those identifying the API action that has been executed. Kuzzle will emit one event before it starts processing the action and one event before sending back the response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The most frequently used events are those emitted directly by the API action that is being executed. Kuzzle emits one event before it starts processing the action, and another one before sending the response back to the client.
```

The format of those events is the following:
 - `<controller>:before<Action>`: emitted before processing

>  - `<controller>:after<action>`: emitted after processing, before sending back the response

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - `<controller>:after<Action>`: emitted after processing, before sending back the response
```

Restarts your application with the following command to display events: `DEBUG=kuzzle:events npm run dev`

::: info

> Kuzzle use the [debug](https://www.npmjs.com/package/debug) package to display messages.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kuzzle uses the [debug](https://www.npmjs.com/package/debug) package to display messages.  
```

> Learn more about debug message in the [Debugging Kuzzle](/core/2/debugging) guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Learn more about debug messages in the [Debugging Kuzzle](/core/2/debugging) guide.
```

:::

Then execute the `server:now` action with Kourou: `kourou server:now`

You should see the following lines in your first terminal:
```bash
  [...]

  kuzzle:events Triggering pipe "server:beforeNow" with payload: [ Request { /* ... */ } ] +0ms

  kuzzle:events Triggering pipe "server:afterNow" with payload: [ Request { /* ... */ } ] +1ms

  [...]
```

::: warning

> Kuzzle emit many other event during request processing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kuzzle emits many other events during request processing.
```

> Be careful to only use documented events. Some events are for internal use and are subject to change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Be careful to only use documented events. Some events are for internal use and are subject to change without notice.
```

:::

> ## Plug into events with Pipes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Plugging to events with Pipes
```

Pipes are functions plugged to events, called synchronously by Kuzzle, and receiving information regarding that event.

Pipes can:
  - Decide to abort a task. If a pipe throws an error, Kuzzle interrupts the task, and forwards a standardized version of the thrown error to the originating user
  - Change the received information. Kuzzle will use the updated information upon resuming the task

![pipe workflow](./pipes-workflow.png)

> Each event carry a different payload. This payload must be returned in the pipe function so Kuzzle can continue its execution process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each event carries a different payload. This payload must be returned in the pipe function so Kuzzle can continue its execution process.
```

> ### Register a pipe

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Registering a pipe
```

> We need to use the [Backend.pipe.register](/core/2/some-link) method to register new pipes. This method takes an event name as first parameter and the pipe handler function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We need to use the [Backend.pipe.register](/core/2/some-link) method to register new pipes. This method takes an event name as its first parameter, followed by the pipe handler function.
```

> In this example, we are going to change the return value of the `server:now` action to return date string instead of an UNIX timestamp:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, we are going to change the return value of the `server:now` action to make it return a formatted date string instead of a UNIX timestamp:
```

```js
app.pipe.register('server:afterNow', async request => {
  request.result.now = (new Date()).toUTCString()

  return request
})
```

::: info

> You can register several pipe on the same action, Kuzzle will execute them sequentially.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can register several pipes on the same action, Kuzzle will execute them sequentially.  
```

> However since it's not possible to ensure pipes execution order,  applications should not rely on it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However Kuzzle provides no guarantee on the pipes execution order, so pipes should not make assumptions about what other pipes are (or are not) executed before.
```
